Add Technical Updates to the newsletter draft (#19)
substrate-developer-hub/newsletter: draft/2023-04-substrate-newsletter.md

cumulus companion: https://github.com/paritytech/cumulus/pull/2357

cc @paritytech/subxt-team 

---

Here are note-worthy **node** PRs in Substrate repo merged between 2023-04-01 and 2023-04-30.

---

### [#13925](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13925) sc-allocator: Do not panic on invalid header pointer

We should not panic on an invalid header pointer and instead return an error. It is possible that the application modifies the header pointer illegally, but then we should return an error instead of panicking.

Closes: https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/issues/13924

---

### [#13918](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13918) Unqueue invalid transactions when skipping

The check was intially added by: https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/5121

But a later pr fixed it properly: https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/9789

TLDR: We don't need to check for skipped anymore, as we already remove all transactions that are being unlocked by an invalid transactions and thus, we will not tag them as invalid directly because the nonce for example is incorrect.

Fixes: https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/issues/13911

---

> ### [#13917](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13917) Drain all the pending messages in the channel when `TracingUnboundedReceiver` is dropped
> 
> Fix #13849 
> 
> `tracing_unbounded` uses `async_channel` internally, in which, the pending messages of the channel will not be dropped even if all the receivers have been dropped and these messages can never be accessed.
> 
> This may cause blocking issues when using `tracing_unbounded` to send `Sender<T>` and there is quite a lot of such usage within substrate as #13849 mentioned.
> 
> This PR fixes the issue by manually draining all the pending messages in the channel when `TracingUnboundedReceiver` is dropped and a test is added to cover the abovementioned case.
> 
> cc @bkchr 
> 
> ---
> 
> ### [#13824](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13824) Make blocks per request configurable
> 
> Resolves https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/issues/10130
> 
> 
> ---
> 
> ### [#13799](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13799) Remove deprecated batch verification
> 
> This removes the deprecated batch verification. This was actually never really activated. Nevertheless, we need to keep the host functions around to support old runtimes which may import these host functions. However, we do not give access to these functions anymore. This means that any new runtime can not call them anymore. The host function implementations we keep will not do batch verification and will instead fall back to the always existing option of directly verifying the passed signature. `finish_batch_verification` will return the combined result of all the batch verify calls.
> 
> This removes the `TaskExecutorExt` which only existed to support the batch verification. So, any code that used this extension can just remove the registration of them. It also removes `SignatureBatching` that was used by `frame-executive` to control the batch verification. However, there wasn't any `Verify` implementation that called the batch verification functions.
> 
> polkadot companion: https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/pull/6999
> 
> 
> 
> ---
> 
> ### [#13794](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13794) Fix `try-runtime follow-chain`, try-runtime upgrade tuple tests, cli test utils
> 
> - [x] Fixes `folllow-chain` bug (closes https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/issues/13696)
> - [x] Refactors existing node CLI test utility functions so that they may be used by other packages 
> - [x] Adds a `follow-chain` test (related https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/issues/13796)
> - [x] Adds test validating that `pre_upgrade` and `post_upgrade` hooks are executed correctly for tuple migrations (related: https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/issues/13681)
> 
> ---
> 
> ### [#13769](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13769) ProofRecorder: Implement transactional support
> 
> This implements transactional support for `ProofRecorder`. A transaction can be started with `start_transaction` and then later commited or rolled back. This is important for block producers to not include data from transactions that didn't make it to the block, because they e.g. panicked or similar. 
> 
> Closes: https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/issues/10222
> 
> ---
> 
> ### [#13740](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13740) refactor(sc-executor): use wasm executor builder instead of old apis
> 
> - Use the `builder` style apis to create runtime executor
> - Deprecated the old `new` api for executor
> - Improve and fix inconsistency about executor config(e.g. confused `max_runtime_instances`  with `runtime_cache_size`).
> - Add `new_native_executor` to reduce boilerplate code.
> 
> --- 
> polkadot address: 15ouFh2SHpGbHtDPsJ6cXQfes9Cx1gEFnJJsJVqPGzBSTudr
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***In this edition, we’re experimenting with a new way to provide a digest of the latest updates to Substrate. If you have any feedback, please let us know by [opening an issue](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/newsletter/issues) – we welcome your input.***

_Here are note-worthy **runtime** PRs in the Substrate repo merged between 2023-04-01 and 2023-04-30._

### [#13851](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13851) Fix fungible and fungibles set_balance return value

There is a bug in the calculation of the return value of the `fungible` and `fungibles` `set_balance` default implementation.

The doc comment says it should return the new balance, but instead it returns `requested_balance +/- balance_change`.

### [#13835](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13835) `RemovePallet` migration utility struct

Migration utility struct that allows easily removing pallet storage on the next runtime upgrade. 

Useful for things like removing Gov V1 pallet storage after the switch to OpenGov.

### [#13798](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13798) Uniform pallet warnings

This PR introduces [proc-macro-warning](https://github.com/ggwpez/proc-macro-warning) to emit a warning when using a hard-coded weight on a non-dev-mode pallet (https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13774).  
In cases where `dev` mode is not possible and you explicitly want to ignore this warning; wrap it in curly brackets like `{1}`.

### [#13779](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13779) Add Freeze/Thaw events and tests

This PR adds a `Freeze` and `Thaw` event to the Balances pallet. Each respective event is emitted whenever some balance is frozen or thawed.

### [#13724](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13724) Contracts: add sr25519_verify

This PR adds the ability to do sr25519 (schnorrkel) signature verification as part of the Contract pallet's core API.

### [#13722](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13722) Implement #[pallet::composite_enum]

This PR adds a couple of new pallet parts: `FreezeReason`, `HoldReason`, `LockId` and `SlashReason`. The corresponding aggregate enums `RuntimeFreezeReason`, `RuntimeHoldReason`, `RuntimeLockId` and `RuntimeSlashReason` are also generated by `construct_runtime`. This is primarily used in pallets that wish to provide a reason for freezing funds, holding funds, locking funds and/or slashing funds in them. `#[pallet::composite_enum]` is also added as an attribute to put on top of an enum declared in a pallet module.

### [#13699](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13699) Deprecate V1 Weights

This PR is part of the first round of cleanups to get completely rid of 1D weights.

### [#13610](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13610) Refactor: inconsistent BalanceConversion fn

Fixes an inconsistent function naming for `BalanceConversion` trait: The `fn to_asset_balance` does not align with generics `InBalance` and `OutBalance` as `to_asset_balance` implies `OutBalance` to never be the native one.

### [#13302](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13302) Metadata V15: Add Runtime API metadata

This PR collects the runtime API information for the metadata V15 and exposes the metadata under `metadata_at_version(u32::MAX)`. 

---

_Here are note-worthy **node** PRs in the Substrate repo merged between 2023-04-01 and 2023-04-30._

### [#13925](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13925) sc-allocator: Do not panic on invalid header pointer

We should not panic on an invalid header pointer and instead return an error. It is possible that the application modifies the header pointer illegally, but then we should return an error instead of panicking.

### [#13824](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13824) Make blocks per request configurable

Resolves https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/issues/10130

### [#13799](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13799) Remove deprecated batch verification

This removes the deprecated batch verification. This was actually never really activated. Nevertheless, we need to keep the host functions around to support old runtimes which may import these host functions. However, we do not give access to these functions anymore. This means that any new runtime can not call them anymore. The host function implementations we keep will not do batch verification and will instead fall back to the always existing option of directly verifying the passed signature. `finish_batch_verification` will return the combined result of all the batch verify calls.

### [#13794](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13794) Fix `try-runtime follow-chain`, try-runtime upgrade tuple tests, cli test utils

This PR fixes a bug with `follow-chain` and refactors existing node CLI test utility functions so that they may be used by other packages. 

### [#13769](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13769) ProofRecorder: Implement transactional support

This implements transactional support for `ProofRecorder`. A transaction can be started with `start_transaction` and then later committed or rolled back. This is important for block producers to not include data from transactions that didn't make it to the block, because they e.g. panicked or similar. 

### [#13740](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/pull/13740) Refactor(sc-executor): use wasm executor builder instead of old apis

This PR adds the `builder` style apis to create runtime executor and deprecates the old `new` api for executor.
```
